# PSMQTT Usage

## General information about tasks and MQTT topics

Every utilization task has its own special name. It always starts with
task name that could be followed with unique parameter name or/and
device number/name.

E.g. task to get percent of CPU used by user apps use name
**cpu_times_percent/user**. All possible tasks are described below.

Results for task TASK are pushed to the MQTT topic
**psmqtt/COMPUTER_NAME/TASK** (prefix \"psmqtt/COMPUTER_NAME/\" is
configurable)

In case of task execution error message is sent to the topic
**psmqtt/COMPUTER_NAME/error/TASK**

Very often it could be useful to provide several parameters from the
same task using one request. In such case next formats are used:

-   TASK/\* - to get all possible parameters (MQTT topic per parameter)
-   or TASK/\*; - to get all possible parameters in one topic (combined
    to JSON string)

Examples:

    Task cpu_times_percent/* provides
    psmqtt/COMPUTER_NAME/cpu_times_percent/user 12.0
    psmqtt/COMPUTER_NAME/cpu_times_percent/nice  1.0
    psmqtt/COMPUTER_NAME/cpu_times_percent/system 5.0
    etc

    Task cpu_times_percent/*; provides
    psmqtt/COMPUTER_NAME/cpu_times_percent/*; {"user": 12.0, "nice": 1.0, "system": 5.0, ...}

## Formatting output

Output of task could be formatted using
[Jinja2](http://jinja.pocoo.org/) templates. Append template to the task
after one more \"/\" separator.

E.g.

:   cpu_times_percent/user/{{x}}%

To append % symbol after CPU usage.

For task providing many parameters (having \*) all parameters are
available by name if they are named or by index as x\[1\] if they are
numbered.

NOTE: After formatting tasks providing many parametes are combined to
single one.

Unnamed parameters are avaiable as x.

All additional filters are defined at the filters.py file. You also can
add custom filters there.

Next filters are implemented now:

    KB,MB,GB - to format value in bytes as KBytes, MBytes or GBytes.
    uptime - to format boot_time as uptime string representation.

Examples:

    virtual_memory/*/{{(100*free/total)|int}}% - free virtual memory in %
    boot_time/{{x|uptime}} - uptime
    cpu_times_percent/user/*/{{x[0]+x[1]}} - user CPU times for first and second processors total
    virtual_memory/free/{{x|MB}} - Free RAM in MB

## Configuration

All configuration is present in **psmqtt.conf** file in the app\'s
directory or any other file referenced by **PSMQTTCONFIG** environment
variable.

The configuration file is parsed using Python interpreter and contains
constants for MQTT broker connection and tasks that have to be executed
periodically (schedule).

There are two ways how to force sending some system state parameter over
MQTT topic

1.  Schedule
2.  MQTT request

## Schedule

**schedule** parameter in **psmqtt.conf** is a Python map having
human-readable period as a key and task name (or list of task names) as
a value.

You can check examples of recurring period definitions
[here](https://github.com/kvh/recurrent).

Also value for scheduled task could be specified as Python dict
({\"key\": \"value\"} notation) to send result to the topic different to
the task name.

E.g. {\"boot_time/{{x\|uptime}}\": \"uptime\"} to have boot time posted
to the psmqtt/COMPUTER_NAME/uptime topic.

**NOTE**: Please note that keys in Python dict (**schedule**) should be
unique and if there are several schedules with the same period - only
last one will be used. To avoid such issue please use period mapped to
the list (or dict) of tasks.

## MQTT request

It\'s better to describe how to use it using example. To get information
for task \"cpu_percent\" with MQTT prefix \"psmqtt/COMPUTER_NAME/\" you
need to send any string on topic:

    psmqtt/COMPUTER_NAME/request/cpu_percent

and result will be pushed on the topic:

    psmqtt/COMPUTER_NAME/cpu_percent

## Tasks

CPU :

    cpu_times/* - CPU times information. Topic per parameter
    cpu_times/*;  - CPU times information in one topic (JSON string)
    cpu_times/{user/nice/system/idle/iowait/irq/softirq/steal/guest} - CPU times separate parameters
    cpu_percent - CPU total usage in percent
    cpu_percent/* - CPU usage in percent. Topic per CPU number
    cpu_percent/*; - CPU usage in percent per CPU in one topic (JSON string)
    cpu_percent/{0/1/2/etc} - CPU usage for single CPU
    cpu_times_percent/* - CPU times in percent. Topic per parameter
    cpu_times_percent/*;  - CPU times in percent in one topic (JSON string)
    cpu_times_percent/{user/nice/system/idle/iowait/irq/softirq/steal/guest} - CPU times in percent separate parameters
    cpu_times_percent/{user/nice/system/idle/iowait/irq/softirq/steal/guest}/* - CPU times in percent separate parameters. Topic per CPU number
    cpu_times_percent/{user/nice/system/idle/iowait/irq/softirq/steal/guest}/*; - CPU times in percent separate parameters per CPU number in one topic (JSON string)
    cpu_times_percent/{user/nice/system/idle/iowait/irq/softirq/steal/guest}/{0/1/2/etc} - CPU times in percent separate parameters for single CPU
    cpu_times_percent/*/{0/1/2/etc} - CPU times in percent for single CPU. Topic per parameter
    cpu_times_percent/*;/{0/1/2/etc} - CPU times in percent for single CPU in one topic (JSON string)
    cpu_stats/* - CPU statistics. Topic per parameter
    cpu_stats/*;  - CPU statistics in one topic (JSON string)
    cpu_stats/{ctx_switches/interrupts/soft_interrupts/syscalls} - CPU statistics separate parameters

Memory :

    virtual_memory/* - Virtual memory. Topic per parameter
    virtual_memory/*;  - Virtual memory in one topic (JSON string)
    virtual_memory/{total/available/percent/used/free/active/inactive/buffers/cached} - Virtual memory separate parameters
    swap_memory/* - Swap memory. Topic per parameter
    swap_memory/*;  - Swap memory in one topic (JSON string)
    swap_memory/{total/used/free/percent/sin/sout} - Swap memory separate parameters

Disks :

    disk_partitions/{device/mountpoint/fstype/opts}/* - Disk partitions separate parameters. Topic per disk number
    disk_partitions/{device/mountpoint/fstype/opts}/*; - Disk partitions separate parameters per disk number in one topic (JSON string)
    disk_partitions/{device/mountpoint/fstype/opts}/{0/1/2/etc} - Disk partitions separate parameter for single disk number
    disk_partitions/*/{0/1/2/etc} - Disk partitions parameters for single disk number. Topic per parameter
    disk_partitions/*;/{0/1/2/etc} - Disk partitions parameters for single disk number in one topic (JSON string)
    disk_usage/{total/used/free/percent}/{drive} - Disk usage single parameter (slashes in drive should be replaced with vertical slash)
    disk_usage/*/{drive} - Disk usage separate parameters. Topic per parameter
    disk_usage/*;/{drive} - Disk usage separate parameters in one topic (JSON string)
    disk_io_counters/* - Disk I/O counters. Topic per parameter
    disk_io_counters/*;  - Disk I/O counters in one topic (JSON string)
    disk_io_counters/{read_count/write_count/read_bytes/write_bytes/read_time/write_time/read_merged_count/write_merged_count/busy_time} - Disk I/O counters separate parameters
    disk_io_counters/{read_count/write_count/read_bytes/write_bytes/read_time/write_time/read_merged_count/write_merged_count/busy_time}/* - Disk I/O counters separate parameters. Topic per disk number
    disk_io_counters/{read_count/write_count/read_bytes/write_bytes/read_time/write_time/read_merged_count/write_merged_count/busy_time}/*; - Disk I/O counters separate parameters per disk number in one topic (JSON string)
    disk_io_counters/{read_count/write_count/read_bytes/write_bytes/read_time/write_time/read_merged_count/write_merged_count/busy_time}/{0/1/2/etc} - Disk IO counters separate parameters for single disk
    disk_io_counters/*/{0/1/2/etc} - Disk I/O counters for single disk. Topic per parameter
    disk_io_counters/*;/{0/1/2/etc} - Disk I/O counters for single disk in one topic (JSON string)

Network :

    net_io_counters/* - Network I/O counters. Topic per parameter
    net_io_counters/*;  - Network I/O counters in one topic (JSON string)
    net_io_counters/{bytes_sent/bytes_recv/packets_sent/packets_recv/errin/errout/dropin/dropout} - Network I/O counters separate parameters
    net_io_counters/{bytes_sent/bytes_recv/packets_sent/packets_recv/errin/errout/dropin/dropout}/* - Network I/O counters separate parameters. Topic per device name
    net_io_counters/{bytes_sent/bytes_recv/packets_sent/packets_recv/errin/errout/dropin/dropout}/*; - Network I/O counters separate parameters per device in one topic (JSON string)
    net_io_counters/{bytes_sent/bytes_recv/packets_sent/packets_recv/errin/errout/dropin/dropout}/{eth0/wlan0/etc} - Network I/O counters separate parameters for single device
    net_io_counters/*/{eth0/wlan0/etc} - Network I/O counters for single device. Topic per parameter
    net_io_counters/*;/{eth0/wlan0/etc} - Network I/O counters for single device in one topic (JSON string)

Temperature :

    sensors_temperatures/* - Sensors current temperatures. Topic per sensor
    sensors_temperatures/*;  - Sensors current temperatures in one topic (JSON string)
    sensors_temperatures/{SENSOR_NAME} - Single sensor current temperature (could be array value if sensor has several devices)
    sensors_temperatures/{SENSOR_NAME}/* - Single sensor temperatures. Topic per temperature
    sensors_temperatures/{SENSOR_NAME}/*; - Single sensor temperatures in one topic (JSON string)
    sensors_temperatures/{SENSOR_NAME}/{DEVICE_NUMBER/DEVICE_LABEL} - Single sensor device by number/label current temperature
    sensors_temperatures/{SENSOR_NAME}/{DEVICE_NUMBER/DEVICE_LABEL}/* - Single sensor device by number/label temperature. Topic per parameter
    sensors_temperatures/{SENSOR_NAME}/{DEVICE_NUMBER/DEVICE_LABEL}/*; - Single sensor device by number/label temperature in one topic (JSON string)
    sensors_temperatures/{SENSOR_NAME}/{DEVICE_NUMBER/DEVICE_LABEL}/{label/current/high/critical} - Single sensor device by number/label temperature separate parameters

Fan speed :

    sensors_fans/* - Fans current speeds. Topic per fan
    sensors_fans/*;  - Fans current speeds in one topic (JSON string)
    sensors_fans/{SENSOR_NAME} - Single fan current speed (could be array value if fan has several devices)
    sensors_fans/{SENSOR_NAME}/* - Single fan speeds. Topic per speed
    sensors_fans/{SENSOR_NAME}/*; - Single fan speeds in one topic (JSON string)
    sensors_fans/{SENSOR_NAME}/{DEVICE_NUMBER/DEVICE_LABEL} - Single fan device by number/label current speed
    sensors_fans/{SENSOR_NAME}/{DEVICE_NUMBER/DEVICE_LABEL}/* - Single fan device by number/label speed. Topic per parameter
    sensors_fans/{SENSOR_NAME}/{DEVICE_NUMBER/DEVICE_LABEL}/*; - Single fan device by number/label speed in one topic (JSON string)
    sensors_fans/{SENSOR_NAME}/{DEVICE_NUMBER/DEVICE_LABEL}/{label/current/high/critical} - Single fan device by number/label speed separate parameters

Battery :

    sensors_battery/* - Battery state. Topic per parameter
    sensors_battery/*;  - Battery state parameters in one topic (JSON string)
    sensors_battery/{percent/secsleft/power_plugged} - Battery state separate parameters
         where secsleft could be
             -1 if time is unknown
             -2 for unlimited time (power is plugged)
             or time in seconds

Other system info :

    users/{name/terminal/host/started}/* - Active users separate parameters. Topic per user
    users/{name/terminal/host/started}/*; - Active users separate parameters per user in one topic (JSON string)
    users/{name/terminal/host/started}/{0/1/2/etc} - Active users separate parameter for single user
    users/*/{0/1/2/etc} - Active users parameters for single user. Topic per parameter
    users/*;/{0/1/2/etc} - Active users parameters for single user in one topic (JSON string)
    boot_time - System boot time as a Unix timestamp
    boot_time/{{x|uptime}} - String representation of up time

Processes :

    pids/* - all system processes IDs. Topic per process
    pids/*; - all system processes IDs in one topic (JSON string)
    pids/{0/1/2/etc} - single process ID
    pids/count - total number of processes
    processes/{PROCESS_ID}/{PARAMETER_NAME} - single process parameter(s)
        where PROCESS_ID could be one of
            - numeric ID of the process
            - top_cpu - top CPU consuming process
            - top_cpu[N] - CPU consuming process number N
            - top_memory - top memory consuming process
            - top_memory[N] - memory consuming process number N
            - pid[PATH] - process with ID specified in the file having PATH path (.pid file). Slashes in path should be replaced with vertical slash
            - name[PATTERN] - process with name matching PATTERN pattern (use * to match zero or more characters, ? for single character)
            - * - to get value of some property for all processes. Topic per process ID
            - *; - to get value of some property for all processes in one topic (JSON string)
        and PARAMETER_NAME could be one of
            - pid - process ID
            - ppid - parent process ID
            - name - process name
            - exe - process executable file
            - cwd - process working directory
            - cmdline/* - command line. Topic per line
            - cmdline/*; - command line in one topic (JSON string)
            - cmdline/count - number of command line lines
            - cmdline/{0/1/etc} - command line single line
            - status - process status (running/sleeping/idle/dead/etc)
            - username - user started process
            - create_time - time when process was started (Unix timestamp)
            - terminal - terminal of the process
            - uids/* - process user IDs. Topic per parameter
            - uids/*; - process user IDs in one topic (JSON string)
            - uids/{real/effective/saved} - process user IDs single parameter
            - gids/* - process group IDs. Topic per parameter
            - gids/*; - process group IDs in one topic (JSON string)
            - gids/{real/effective/saved} - process group IDs single parameter
            - cpu_times/* - process CPU times. Topic per parameter
            - cpu_times/*; - process CPU times in one topic (JSON string)
            - cpu_times/{user/system/children_user/children_system} - process CPU times single parameter
            - cpu_percent - CPU percent used by process
            - memory_percent - memory percent used by process
            - memory_info/* - memory used by process. Topic per parameter
            - memory_info/*; - memory used by process in one topic (JSON string)
            - memory_info/{rss/vms/shared/text/lib/data/dirty/uss/pss/swap} - memory used by process single parameter
            - io_counters/* - process I/O counters. Topic per parameter
            - io_counters/*; - process I/O counters in one topic (JSON string)
            - io_counters/{read_count/write_count/read_bytes/write_bytes} - process I/O single counter
            - num_threads - number of threads
            - num_fds - number of file descriptors
            - num_ctx_switches/* - number of context switches. Topic per parameter
            - num_ctx_switches/*; - number of context switches in one topic (JSON string)
            - num_ctx_switches/{voluntary/involuntary} - context switches single counter
            - nice - nice value
            - * - all process properties. Topic per property
            - *; - all process properties in one topic (JSON string)
            - ** - all process properties and sub-properties. Topic per property
            - **; -  all process properties and sub-properties in one topic (JSON string)

## Useful tasks

**boot_time/{{x\|uptime}}** - Up time

**cpu_percent** - CPU usage in percent

**virtual_memory/percent** - RAM usage in percent

**virtual_memory/free/{{x\|MB}}** - Free RAM in MB

**disk_usage/percent/\|** - root drive (slash replaced with vertical
slash) usage in percent (Linux)

**disk_usage/free/\|/{{x\|GB}}** - space left in GB for root drive
(Linux)

**disk_usage/percent/C:** - C:/ drive usage in percent (Windows)

**processes/top_cpu/name** - name of top process consuming CPU

**processes/top_memory/exe** - executable file of top process consuming
memory

**smart/nvme0/** - all the device \'nvme0\' SMART data, requries SUDO

**smart/nvme0/temperature** - \'nvme0\' temperature, requires SUDO



## Useful Tasks

These are 'tasks' I found most relevant and useful for tracking my
server(s) health and performance:

Task|Description
----|------------
`cpu_percent`|CPU total usage in percent
`sensors_temperatures/coretemp/0/`|CPU package temperature
`virtual_memory/percent`|Virtual memory used
`virtual_memory/free/{{x\|GB}}`|Virtual memory free, GB
`swap_memory/percent`|Swap memory used
`sensors_fans/dell_smm/0`|Fan seed
`sensors_battery/percent`|Battery charge
